# Programmer's Guide: Runtime Compilation

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> As of Basic4GL language version 2.5.1 the following functions are deprecated: `Compile`, `CompileFile`, `Execute`
>
> If at all possible you should use the `comp` and `exec` commands that are documented in the Language Syntax Guide
> (as they are now built in language commands).

These old functions are still available for backwards compatibility with older Basic4GL programs.
However, they cannot be used in combination with user functions and subs,
and you will get a runtime error if you try to do so.

The exception is the following functions: `CompilerError`, `CompilerErrorLine` and `CompilerErrorCol`.

These are still considered current, and can be used with the new `comp` command.

The following functions can be used to compile and execute code at runtime:
- `Compile`
- `CompileFile`
- `Execute`

### Compile

`Compile(text)` compiles text into program code, and returns an integer that identifies the compiled code.

Example:
```
dim code
code = Compile("printr " + chr$(34) + "Hello world" + chr$(34))
Execute(code)
```

`Text` can either be a string, or an array of strings.

If the text compiles successfully, `Compile` returns an integer handle that can be passed to the `Execute` function.

If the text does not compile, `Compile` returns `0`, and the error description and position can be extracted using the
`CompilerError`, `CompilerErrorLine` and `CompilerErrorCol` functions.

### CompileFile
`CompileFile(filename)` loads a file from disk, compiles it, and returns an integer that identifies the compiled code.

Example:

```
dim code
code = CompileFile("md2viewer.gb")
if code = 0 lor not Execute(code) then
printr CompilerError()
endif
```
> [!Important]
>
> `CompileFile` can compile just about any program that can be loaded into Basic4GL and compiled manually.
> However, there are some limitations:
> - `CompileFile` does not support includes.
> - `CompileFile` does not support plugins.

### Execute
`Execute(handle)` executes a block of compiled code.

`handle` must be a valid handle returned from a successful `Compile` or `CompileFile`.

If the code completes without any errors, `Execute` returns `true`. Otherwise, `execute` returns `false`,
and the error message can be read using the `CompilerError`, `CompilerErrorLine` and `CompilerErrorCol` functions.

The compiled code will execute until one of the following occurs:

- The end of the code is reached.
- An `end` instruction is reached.
- A `run` instruction is reached (this is considered a run-time error in dynamically compiled code).
- A runtime error occurs.

The program will then continue executing from the next instruction after the `Execute` call.

## Compiling with a "symbol prefix"
These special versions of the above functions can be used to compile code with an automatic "symbol prefix":

- `Compile(text, symbol prefix)`
- `CompileFile(filename, symbol prefix)`

The _symbol prefix_ is a text string that is automatically prefixed to the front of every variable name,
label name or structure name that the runtime compiled program refers to.

For example:
```
dim text$, program, i, __value
text$ = "value = value * value"
program = Compile(text$, "__")  
printr CompilerError()

for i = 1 to 10
  __value = i
  execute(program)
  printr i + ", " + __value
next
```

Here our code to compile at runtime is `value = value * value`.

But because we pass a symbol prefix of `"__"` (double underscore) to the `Compile()` command,
what actually gets compiled is `__value = __value * __value`.

The important thing here is that the runtime code cannot access any of the main program's variables except those that we have prefixed with `"__"`.
It cannot access `i` for example, as `i = 5` would effectively be compiled as `__i = 5`.

We can use this to limit exactly which variables, labels and structure types the runtime compiled program has access to.

### CompilerError, CompilerErrorLine, CompilerErrorCol
`CompilerError()` returns the error message generated by the last `Compile`, `CompileFile` or `Execute` call.

If there was no error (i.e. the call was successful), `CompilerError` returns an empty string (`""`).

`CompilerErrorLine()` and `CompilerErrorCol()` return the line and column of the last error (if applicable).
For a `Compile` or `CompileFile` call, this is the position of the error in the code being compiled.
For an `Execute` call, this is the instruction that caused the run-time error.

## Runtime compilation issues
There are a some potential issues with runtime compiled code that need to be kept in mind.
It is tempting to think that runtime compiled code is crash-proof,
because any runtime errors immediately return control to the calling program which can deal with the error appropriately.

This is true. However, the runtime compiled code has access to everything in the parent program
(by default, although this can be controlled by "symbol prefixes" - see above),
including all variables, labels etc, and can often mess things up enough that
the program will not run correctly when control is returned.

For example, the following program:
```
dim text$, code
text$ = "return"
gosub ExecuteIt
end

ExecuteIt:
  code = Compile(text$)
  if code = 0 lor not Execute(code) then
    printr CompilerError()
  endif
  return
```
stops with a runtime error `"Return without gosub"`, because the runtime compiled code actually returns to the line after the `gosub`,
before finally ending when it reaches the `end` instruction.

This returns control back to the instruction after the `Execute(code)` instruction which attempts to `return` again!

Another issue is that the executed code may never return at all!

Consider:
```
print "Starting"
Execute(Compile("while true: wend"))
print "Ending"
```

The last line is never executed, because the dynamically compiled code (`"while true: wend"`) never exits, and control is never returned.

## Credits
Basic4GL, Copyright (C) 2003-2007 Tom Mulgrew

_Programmer's guide_

26-Jul-2008
Tom Mulgrew

Documentation modified for Markdown formatting by Nathaniel Nielsen